Unless otherwise stated, copyright © 2025 The Open University, all rights reserved.
Printable page generated Sunday 14 December 2025 at 18:39

Data presentation, analysis and interpretation
Having designed your experiments and executed them according to your chosen methods (as discussed in
Methodology and techniques, this document deals with handling and presenting the data that you have
collected. Although I will give you some pointers here, you should consult closely with your supervisor to
decide on the best way of using data to address your research aim.
In a T802 dissertation, poor data analysis can lead to unjustified conclusions, which will cause the
dissertation to lose marks or even fail. In a practical situation, unjustified conclusions might lead to serious
financial, social, environmental or health and safety consequences. As your research progresses and you
are faced with having to analyse a lot of data, you need to keep in mind the following points:
Reaching valid conclusions requires careful analysis of relevant data.
Conclusions have a context; that is, they apply to a particular situation and are not (normally)
universal truths.
Although you will have considered how you anticipated handling the data in the early stages of your
proposal, you will probably need to consider new means of presentation and interpretation when you
start your actual analysis.

Although judgement and intuition play their part, it is well worth considering the wide range of techniques
available to carry out the organising, presenting and analysing tasks that are needed to produce useful
conclusions.
The aims of this document are therefore to:
explain the role of data collection in primary research
explain the options for extracting useful information from the raw data
explain the options for summarising and presenting data in a form that will make it easy to interpret
explain the process of reaching conclusions
explain the significance of your conclusions in a wider context than the particular experiment or case
study.

I do not go into detail here about the many statistical techniques available, nor indeed into the detail of
various techniques for handling qualitative (non-numerical) data. Should you require these techniques (and

the requirements for technological research are numerous and varied), you should consult the books listed
in the References.

1 Introduction to data presentation, analysis and interpretation
Part of the process of developing your research proposal goes beyond the activity of collecting the data
and deals with what you intend to do with it. There is no point in spending all your research time collecting
vast quantities of data, only to find that it does not help you address your research aim. In the early stages
of your project, you will probably not consider the precise details of how to process the data, but you do
need to be able to show that the data you collect will enable you to achieve the research aim. This implies
that you must be able to:
process the raw data collected
decide how to present the data, e.g. in tabular or pictorial form
analyse data using appropriate techniques
reach conclusions from the analysed data.

This assumes that you will be able to interpret the data in order to come to some conclusions that are both
valid and useful. When referring to ‘data’ here I include various types and formats, including numerical
quantities obtained from physical experiments, case-study observations and qualitative data such as the
comments made by participants in an interview.

1.1 A note on terminology
The word data is often used synonymously with the phrase raw data to describe the facts and figures and
opinions (of respondents to a survey, for example) collected through primary research.
When the data has been processed, aggregated or arranged in some way such that it gains meaning, it is
referred to as information. We use information to answer questions (that is, to inform ourselves), and the
information may be further processed, combined and compared to produce more information, and so on.
Ultimately, the information obtained should enable you to achieve your research objectives, and hence
contribute to our knowledge of the subject.
The term ‘results’ is frequently encountered in research reports. Although it is a valid and colloquially useful
word, it is used in several different contexts and can sometimes cause confusion. ‘Results’ can be used to
mean:
data obtained as the outputs of primary research
results of analysis, implying information
the successful or unsuccessful outcomes of the research.

For this reason I have not used the term in this document. The word ‘findings’ is also ambiguous, and for
the same reason is avoided here.
Here is an example intended to illustrate the distinctions made.

Data concerning refuse sorting was obtained from households on the quantities of separated glass,
paper, cans, etc. collected for recycling, and on people’s ability and willingness to sort them. This led
to information about the extent to which recycling of refuse was being achieved, and how much
further education was needed. This in turn led to conclusions about actions that could be taken by
the refuse-collecting organisation. Consequent changes in refuse collection would, it was hoped, lead
to greater knowledge of how recycling rates can be improved.

1.2 The process of reaching conclusions
In the early stages of the research, you need to establish your aim and develop the research objectives
that are intended to address the aim. The methodology should produce the data that you will need to
achieve the objectives. When you were deciding what data to collect, you should also have been thinking
about how you would use it to achieve your research objectives, so as you are collecting the data, you
should already have some ideas about how to analyse it.
However, once you have started collecting your data, you may find that it accumulates at an alarming rate,
and you are less clear about what to do with it all. So here are the next stages you need to undertake.
1. Process the data so that you have recorded it in a useful format.
2. Select and use a presentation method such as a graph, figure or table in order to arrange the data in
a form that will help to derive meaning (that is, provide useful information).
3. Interpret the data to obtain the information that will achieve the objectives.
4. Explain how achieving the objectives addresses the research aim.
5. Derive conclusions about the wider applicability of the research.
6. Suggest where further progress could be made by continuing the research.

Bear in mind that this will be an iterative process; you are likely to go through this cycle two or three times
in the course of your research.

1.3 Using information to draw conclusions
When are your conclusions justified by the data? Value judgement may be used in the process of reaching
conclusions, such as in deciding which data to select and analyse. However, this must be done as
objectively as possible, and result in conclusions that are demonstrably based on the evidence obtained.
Conclusions arise from the use of reasoning, carefully accumulated data, some intuition and experience.
Data must be interpreted carefully, with due regard to accuracy, relevance and appropriate statistical
interpretation. Matters of human judgement are important, but are not in themselves sufficient to make a
case without detailed supporting evidence, at least not in the technological context of T802.
So what kinds of data are most widely used in the context of T802 research? Some of the most valuable
kinds of data are:
data obtained by observation
data obtained from experimentation
identification of trends

tests of significance
tests for correlation
comments from stakeholders, experts and practitioners.

The final bullet point may seem to lack objectivity, and indeed the comments of one stakeholder or expert
may differ from, or explicitly contradict, those of another. However, the collected comments of a
representative sample may provide useful evidence for part of the process of forming conclusions. Bear in
mind at all times, that if meaningful inferences are to be made from this sort of data, then it must be very
carefully collected, and any conclusions drawn must take into account the limitations of the dataset (in
particular, see Section 3.3 of Methodology and techniques on sampling).

1.4 Information and conclusions in their context
The quality of information obtained and the validity of conclusions reached are crucially dependent on what
you choose to investigate (i.e. your experimental sample, whether that is the performance of a piece of
equipment, or responses from participants in a survey). The information and conclusions you derive are
bounded by the sample chosen, and must be explained in terms of this context. Consider a practical
example:
A prototype of some innovative computer-aided design (CAD) software has been tested for usability
with five experienced CAD users as subjects, their backgrounds being in mechanical, civil and
electronic (circuit-board design) engineering. Whilst a range of views were expressed, the testing has
resulted in a coherent set of conclusions about which aspects were deemed satisfactory and which
need improvement. It can be reasonably asserted that these conclusions are valid (that is, true, with
high probability) in the context of all engineers experienced in using CAD. The conclusions could not,
at this stage, be claimed to be valid in the context of (a) all engineers, (b) engineering trainees, (c)
CAD users from non-engineering backgrounds or (d) all computer users, though the validity of the
conclusions in these contexts might later be assessed by conducting further tests.

Activity 1
Go to Activity 1 on the use of data and information in your project.

2 Analysis and interpretation of data using basic statistical
techniques
The term statistics tends to be used in a number of different contexts and with different shades of
meaning. The term is usually used to mean either:
descriptive statistics, which is about the use of metrics and visualisations to present summaries of
a collection of related data (such as average rainfall by location), or
inferential statistics, which is about using statistical techniques to learn about the properties of a
collection of objects from a sample. Such claims are, of course, subject to error, so much statistical

analysis is about determining how confident one can be about the inferences made.

In this section, I briefly consider some of the statistical methods that you might use to present and interpret
your data. As ever, the main issue is how to select the appropriate technique for what is required; that is,
the appropriate way to view the data in order to answer questions posed or reveal useful information. The
danger is that it is easy to be misled if an inappropriate technique is selected. Similarly, overuse of
mathematics or statistics can lead readers to believe that your results are better-founded than they actually
are. When you use statistical analyses, it is important to consider the following questions:
Have you considered the nature and completeness of your data selected when deciding how the data
should be processed?
Is the quantity of data sufficient to justify any statistical claims that you are making?
Is the chosen statistical method appropriate and justifiable in the context being considered?

Bear in mind that there are two possible contexts in which you may be carrying out these analyses: you
might be analysing an initial data set to suggest how you will carry on the research, or you might be
choosing a means of presenting data in the most informative way for your final dissertation. In these
cases, the context will affect your choice of analysis and presentation.
An excellent (and short!) guide to the possible ways of abusing statistics, is Darrell Huff’s How To Lie With
Statistics (1991). This is well worth reading to show how badly choosing or presenting statistics
(unintentionally, as well as deliberately) can mislead readers and make unfounded inferences from the
available data.

2.1 Basic statistical measures
Arithmetic mean
The very basic concept of the arithmetic mean is fundamental to many a statistical investigation, but be
careful in using the term ‘average’ to refer to the arithmetic mean, as it can also be used for the median
value of a set of data (see below). The ‘arithmetic mean’, or ‘mean average’ is obtained by adding up all
the values of the occurrences and dividing by the number of occurrences. For instance, the mean of the
data set 6, 3, 1, 9, 4, 3, 3, 7, 1, 3 is
(6 + 3 + 1 + 9 + 4 + 3 + 3 + 7 + 1 + 3) / 10 = 4
The mean value may be the principal factor in reaching a conclusion, as in the following examples:
The mean average quantity of recycled paper per household per week was …, which is
commendable.
The mean average temperature recorded for the month was …, which is unusually cold for March.
The mean average wage for the organisation was … per hour, which is high for the industry sector.

Yet such conclusions may be of little value because they don’t tell the whole story, and may even be
dangerously misleading.

The mean average quantity of recycled paper may have been strongly influenced by a small number
of atypical households. Perhaps some houses were also used as home-offices, which produced large
amounts of waste and masked the low rates of recycling by other households.
The supposedly cold month of March might have included a few unusually frosty nights, so that for
gardening and agricultural purposes, ‘unusually cold’ could be a misleading conclusion.
The wages for the organisation might have included some very low wages, counterbalanced by some
very high wages, so that overall the conclusion of ‘high for the industry sector’ is not convincing.

In such cases, we clearly need more information than just the mean average in order to describe the
situation and reach a conclusion that tells a more realistic and useful story. Pictorial representation, for
example in the form of a bar chart, may be sufficient. We may also need to look at other calculable factors,
in particular the median, the mode and the spread (measured by its standard deviation).

Median
Given an ordered set of numerical data, the median is the value that has the same number of values
above it as below (for an even number of values, the median is often taken to be the mean of the two
middle values, if these are different). For instance, ordering the data set above gives 1, 1, 3, 3, 3, 3, 4, 6,
7, 9; here the two middle values are both 3, so the median is 3.
For a symmetric spread of data, the median and mean will be the same (or at least, very close). In the
case of heavily skewed data, the median may be of more interest than the mean, in that it is less likely to
be skewed by small numbers of unusually high or low values. Therefore, it is often used to better identify a
‘typical’ value than the arithmetic mean.

Mode
If one value predominates in a set of data, this is termed the mode. For example, the most frequent value
in the data set above is 3, so this is the mode.
The mode may be of use in identifying a strong preference or an overriding numerical value, but is
otherwise not frequently encountered. Note that there could be two or more modes, which would be shown
clearly on a line graph or bar chart as peaks of equal height, adding more useful information than just the
mean and median.

Spread and standard deviation
Given several sets of values, shown in the form of a line graph or bar chart, it could be that they have the
same arithmetic mean but are different in the spread of their values. Consider the sets of values A and B:
A: 6, 3, 1, 9, 4, 3, 3, 7, 1, 3
B: 3, 4, 4, 5, 4

Here A and B have the same arithmetic mean, 4, but clearly A has a wider spread of values.

A commonly used measure of the spread of data is the standard deviation, which expresses the extent to
which data is dispersed away from the arithmetic mean. Arithmetically it is the square root of the variance,
which is the average of squares of the distances between the arithmetic mean and the data points.
To calculate the standard deviation of the set A above, first calculate the mean average:
(6 + 3 + 1 + 9 + 4 + 3 + 3 + 7 + 1 + 3) / 10 = 4
Then calculate the variance:
[(6 - 4)﻿2 + (3 - 4)﻿2 + (1 - 4)﻿2 + (9 - 4)﻿2 + (4 - 4)﻿2 + (3 - 4)﻿2 + (3 - 4)﻿2 + (7 - 4)﻿2 + (1 - 4)2 + (3 - 4)﻿2)] / 10
= (4 + 1 + 9 + 25 + 0 + 1 + 1 + 9 + 9 + 1) / 10 = 6
And finally, the standard deviation is the (positive) square root of the variance:
√6 ≈ 2.5
Similarly for set B:
mean average of B = (3 + 4 + 4 + 5 + 4) / 5 = 4
variance = [(3 - 4)2 + (4 - 4)2 + (4 - 4)2 + (5 - 4)2 + (4 - 4)2) / 5 = 0.4
standard deviation = √0.4 ≈ 0.63
So A has a higher standard deviation than B.
The standard deviation is also referred to as the root mean square (RMS) deviation of the data values from
the arithmetic mean.
The more the data is located near the mean, the smaller the standard deviation is; the more it is dispersed
away from the mean, the larger the standard deviation is. This concept and technique may be of use in the
T802 context when considering sets of data that change over time. In such a case the standard deviation
as well as the arithmetic mean would be of interest.

2.2 Carrying out statistical tests
The question to ask is not which statistical test should be used, but whether your experiment design was
one to which statistical tests can be applied. There are many ways of comparing the results of
experiments, and statistical tests can only be properly applied if the experiment design is itself sound. So
the most important factor is not doing the statistical tests but looking carefully at the experimental design.
Some introductory information on carrying out statistical tests is available from Rowntree’s Statistics
Without Tears (2000). In general, statistical tests are applied to different sets of data in order to give a
measure of whether any differences observed in those sets are a result of a genuine difference, or whether
they could be accounted for by the natural random variation in the data. The output of a statistical test is

expressed as a decimal number with a value equal to or less than one (≤1) This number represents the
probability that the differences between two (or more) data sets are due to chance variations caused by
some unknown variable. A probability of 0.1 indicates that the likelihood that a set of results occurred by
chance is 10%. The lower the probability score from a given statistical test, the greater the significance
that can be attached to the results. Two levels of significance are widely used. A probability of 0.05 (5%) is
generally regarded as significant, and a probability of 0.01 (1%) as highly significant.
A wide range of statistical tests are available using the data analysis tools provided with most spreadsheet
software, such as Microsoft Excel or the (freely available) OpenOffice Calc.

2.3 Correlation and causality
Correlation describes the degree of closeness of two (or more) measures and the direction in which
changes in one measure are reflected by changes in the other. When large values in one measure, e.g.
rate of pay, co-occur with large values in the other measure, e.g. some quantitative measure of job
satisfaction, this is called a positive correlation. If larger values in one measure, e.g. frequency of rest
periods, co-occur with smaller values of another measure, e.g. frequency of making errors, this is said to
be a negative correlation.
Let us look at some simple examples of the correlation between two variables from an imaginary
experiment. Suppose we were to measure the length in centimetres and weight in grams of a bunch of
carrots. We plot the length and weight of the carrots on a scatter diagram in which one axis is length and
the other is weight. Suppose that we discover in doing this plot that the dots form an absolutely straight
line so that for each increase in 1 cm of length there is a corresponding increase of 8 g in weight. The plot
would look like that shown in Figure 1 and describes a perfect positive correlation. A perfect negative
correlation would result in a perfectly straight line going from a high value on the y-axis to a low value on
the y-axis of a scatter diagram.

Figure 1 Height and weight correlation in an imaginary sample of carrots
Show description

The scales chosen on graphs of this kind can exaggerate or minimise the degree of change graphed, so
they should be chosen carefully to avoid misleading the reader.
Perfect correlations are extremely rare in experimental data, so our plot of the carrots is likely to look (a bit)
more like that in Figure 2. If some of the dots fall a little to the sides of this straight line, then there is still a
positive correlation, but the correlation isn’t perfect.

Figure 2 Height and weight correlation in an imaginary sample of carrots
Show description

No correlation exists if points plotted do not form a weak or strong association along a line. Figure 3 shows
an example where no correlation exists.

Figure 3 Uncorrelated points
Show description

For further discussions on correlation, including how to interpret measures of correlation, you should
consult a text such as Rowntree (2000) or Rees (2000).
It is essential to note that correlation does not imply a causation. For example, while there may be a
correlation between higher rates of pay and job satisfaction, this is not to say that higher rates of pay
cause job satisfaction. Similarly, suppose that in a manufacturing context a strong correlation has been
identified between late arrival of raw materials and outsourced components (X), and late delivery of
products to customers (Y). It might appear self-evident that X causes Y because of the strong correlation.
Indeed it might be true, but it could be that X has a partial or even minimal effect on Y. Other factors, such
as a processing bottleneck at a particular machine, poor scheduling of skilled operators, faulty output
requiring re-working or many others, might be more significant. To reach conclusions about causes, a
researcher would need to look at the detail of product manufacture that resulted in specific late deliveries.
The causes of the various delays that contributed to the overall delay could then be identified and
prioritised, resulting in a more coherent view of the cause of Y.

2.4 The Pareto principle
A frequently quoted concept is the 80:20 ‘rule’, often referred as the Pareto principle after its originator, in
which 80% of something is related to 20% of something else (although you should treat it as an illustrative
rule of thumb, rather than a reliable rule about phenomena in the world). A typical example is encountered
in the statement ‘80% of our turnover comes from 20% of our customers’ – typical, at least in
approximation, in much of the manufacturing industry. However, this is a rule of thumb or heuristic, and by
no means a universal truth. For example, in the postal industry, it is questionable whether 20% of
customers post 80% of letters. The Pareto principle is commonly encountered, but can be misleading, and
at best should only be used as an approximation.

It is clearly unrealistic to assume that the 80:20 distribution applies to all situations. However, it can be
useful to investigate such distributions as a starting point in analysis, such as investigating fault/cause
situations. We can therefore use Pareto analysis, which is not the same as assuming the Pareto principle,
but is based on the search for the most significant factors, those that could be dominant. In a situation
where over 50 categories of faults are recorded, but the most frequently occurring fault situations appear
to be caused by only a small proportion of the fault categories, then Pareto analysis may be a useful
shortcut to establishing where to apply fault correction most effectively.
One approach would be to analyse the fault occurrences and establish the most frequent causes (for
example, see the discussion by Schulmeyer and McCabe (1998)). There could be around 10 causes (20%
of 50) causing 80% of the occurrences, but there is no natural law that insists on it. Having examined the
overall spread of faults it may be useful to examine in detail the top 3, 7, 15 (or whatever) causes. The
decision would come from the practicalities and context of the actual situation, not from adherence to an
80:20 rule. Pareto analysis refers here to the identification of causes in descending order of frequency, but
could be similarly applied in other distributions of categories.
In summary, Pareto analysis is a useful technique in statistical analysis, but it should not be used with the
assumption of an 80:20 distribution.

2.5 Summary of statistical methods
What can we conclude from this discussion? First, bear in mind that this is not intended to be a detailed
treatise on statistical methods; statistics is a difficult area, and the resources given in the References will
provide you only with an introduction. Here, I want to emphasise the following points.
Be careful about how you use statistical methods, and in any case only use them if dealing with
sufficient quantities of data. Read about your chosen method before using it and be sure you are
using it in an appropriate context. If you do not have a background in statistics, you are advised to
consult with your supervisor on the most appropriate methods to use.
Basic calculations of properties such as the arithmetic mean are useful in themselves, but rarely tell
the whole story. Presenting the complete range of data in suitable graphical form, and calculating
other factors such as standard deviation, can lead to more convincing and reliable conclusions.

Activity 2
Go to Activity 2 on statistical interpretation of quantitative data.

3 Graphical representation of quantitative data
The key to successfully interpreting data is to select the most appropriate way to present the data. If you
choose well, you will be able to see patterns or trends in your data that may not have been visible from the
raw data alone. However, it is easy to choose visualisations of the data which either do not convey a
genuine pattern, or which mislead you into seeing a pattern that is not really there.

It is important to bear in mind that you are likely to use representations in two different ways during your
project.
1. You will find that using some initial plots is invaluable to help you get a feel for the ‘shape’ of the data,
and to spot initial trends. This use of representations is vital to start pointing to the ways you should
go about your final analyses.
2. When writing up your final dissertation, you will use a careful selection of representations that best
convey the key points that you want to make.

Point 2 above is not intended to suggest that you should artificially select a subset of data or a
representation which is most sympathetic to your preferred conclusion. Rather, that your choice of
representation needs to be appropriate for the kind of data that you wish to discuss. For example:
A bar chart is useful for showing the absolute and relative values of discrete variables.
A time-related graph or a histogram is useful for showing trends.
A pie chart will readily show up proportions and quantitative categorisations.
A star or radar chart is a useful pictorial means of comparing several different values of a number of
discrete variables.

The figures in the following sections demonstrate the main methods that can be used for graphical
representation of data. They can readily be reproduced using the graph drawing options in software such
as Microsoft Excel or the OpenOffice suite. They are by no means a comprehensive set, and there are
many variants not shown.

3.1 Line charts and scatter diagrams
A line chart can often be the most useful way to show the correlation between two variables. The most
common type is the straight line chart (Figure 4), which plots a dependent variable (the vertical axis)
against an independent variable (the horizontal axis). Samples are usually taken at regular intervals, but if
a more accurate graph is required then a continuous chart may be used (Figure 5).

Figure 4 Example of a straight line chart: oven temperature vs time

Maximise

Show description

Figure 5 Example of a continuous chart: wind speed variation over 24 hours

Maximise
Show description

A scatter diagram (Figure 6) is also a good way of showing the correlation between two variables. In this
case the variables may be dependent or independent; the plot just shows the association (or lack of
association) between the two.

Figure 6 Example of a scatter diagram: plots of lead time vs complexity

Maximise
Show description

3.2 Bar charts and histograms
It is easy to confuse bar charts and histograms. In general, bar charts are more often used when one of
the variables being considered is discrete – for instance, different companies or different countries.

Histograms, on the other hand, are frequently used when the independent variable is continuous; here the
variable on the horizontal axis is divided into intervals (which may or may not be of equal size) and the
area of the bar represents the information about all the occurrences in the interval.
The main difference between the two types of chart is that in a bar chart it is the height of the bar that
denotes the value, whereas in a histogram it is the area. This distinction is not always obvious, since if the
intervals in a histogram are of equal size then essentially it is the height that matters. However, it is
important to remember the difference when you come across a histogram that has ‘bars’ of different
widths.

Bar charts
A bar chart should be used for showing discrete data, although it can also be useful for revealing trends
over time. However, the bar chart does not attempt to present a continuous picture of how the dependent
variable changes; instead, it compares values for discrete time periods such as weeks, months or years.
Figure 7 shows effluent discharge rates for each of seven weeks. The implication is that this represents
seven different measurements (at one per week). To illustrate the total continuous discharge over a seven
week period, a histogram might be more appropriate.

Figure 7 Example of a bar chart: weekly effluent discharge

Maximise
Show description

A typical spreadsheet will allow you to make many variants of the basic charts, some of which are more
useful than others. For example, Figure 8 shows effluent discharge over a period of 5 weeks, compared
across the years 2009-2011.

Figure 8 Example of a clustered bar chart: effluent discharges compared for weeks 1–5

Maximise

over three years
Show description

In Figure 8, it is clear what the relative values are over the three year periods. It is also reasonably easy to
see what the three individual trends are, although less so than in a chart containing the values from only
one year. Increasing the number of types of object being plotted in a single diagram will usually result in
less clarity.
There are many other means of plotting the data: Figure 9 contains the same data as Figure 8, in a 3D
plot. Although this plot might look impressive, in practice it is less informative than the simpler plot in
Figure 8. For example, in Figure 8 it is straightforward to see the absolute values of the individual bars.
This is much harder in Figure 9. Also, the relative heights of the bars are often less clear. In Figure 8 it is
clear that the week 5 bars are increasing in size over the three years. This is much harder to see in Figure
9.

Figure 9 Example of a 3D clustered bar chart: effluent discharges compared for weeks

Maximise

1–5 over three years
Show description

Bar charts may also be presented horizontally (Figure 10), with the independent and dependent variables
swapping axes. This format is often used in order to compare values of the dependent variable for several
organisations or other entities in a particular month or year, rather than values for the same organisation
over a number of months or years.

Figure 10 Example of a horizontal bar chart: annual profit for companies in 2011

Maximise
Show description

Histograms
The main purpose of a histogram (Figure 11) is to show how samples of continuous data fall into each of
the intervals under consideration. The most common and least common intervals can be seen clearly from
the chart, as can the general shape of the sample distribution.

Figure 11 Example of a histogram: heights of 100 plants using fertiliser A
Show description

Remember that it is area and not height that is important in a histogram. Thus if the areas of all the ‘bars’
are added, the total should be equal to the total number of samples taken. This may involve some
calculation in order to draw the histogram correctly, as shown in the table in Figure 11.
Note that although the figure shows (for example) that a total of eight plants had a height of between 12
and 20 cm, it does not show where in this range they fell – it would be incorrect to assume that the 12–20
cm interval may be divided into smaller intervals of equal frequency. Thus choice of interval size in a
histogram may have a significant effect on the information that may be gained from it.

3.3 Pie Charts
A pie chart (Figure 12) can be useful to show the proportions of different categories that make up a whole.
However, pie charts are only really effective where there are few variables being compared, and they do
not convey the absolute size of the segments. For this reason, it is uncommon to see pie charts being
used in technical literature, where bar charts are more commonly used. A bar chart showing the data from
Figure 12 is given in Figure 13.
Depending on the purpose of the chart it is usually the case that a bar chart is more informative.

Figure 12 Example of a pie chart: proportions of different fault types

Maximise
Show description

Figure 13 Example of a bar chart: absolute number of different fault types
Show description

3.4 Radar charts
A spider or radar chart (Figure 14) is useful for comparing two or more organisations, or one organisation
on several different occasions. By plotting two charts on the same set of axes you can also compare, for
instance, the budget for different departments against their actual spending. Figure 14 shows, from Year 1
to Year 2, a decrease in defective products and an increase in customer satisfaction and turnover.

Figure 14 Example of a radar chart: profile of company performance for Years 1 and 2

Maximise

Show description

Activity 3
Go to Activity 3 on graphical representation of quantitative data.

4 Qualitative data acquisition
4.1 Analysing qualitative materials
Quantitative data implies the collecting of numerical data, yet technological research does not always deal
solely with numbers and statistical calculations. Useful raw data might include:
graphical data such as photographs, diagrams and sketches
observations of how people work and react to situations
observation of machines and mechanical processes
observation of natural processes in the wider environment
personal comments, both oral and written.

Any of these can potentially provide information and insights that help to achieve the objectives. Indeed,
they form the typical components of case-study research. However, of particular importance is the

qualitative data provided by personal comments, which may range from casual chats to formal interviews
and written reports.
I will not go into depth about how to analyse qualitative data from interviews, observations and general
questionaires here. These are potentially very difficult areas, and you are strongly advised to consult a
suitable source for your methodology such as Silverman (2004) or Blaxter et al. (2006). When analysing
qualitative data, you should bear in mind that a weak methodology, or general comments on unsystematic
or arbitrary data are unlikely to provide the evidence required for a successful T802 project.
As an illustration, I will briefly discuss Likert tests, which many T802 students find useful for questionnairebased research.

4.2 Likert tests
Many students working on case studies find it useful to ask respondents to use a Likert scale when
canvassing opinions. When using a Likert scale, a respondent is given a list of statements, and asked to
give the degree to which they agree or disagree with each one. Each statement in the list is called a Likert
item; an example is given in Figure 15.

Figure 15 Example of a 5-point Likert item for a survey question
Show description

The response format for each Likert item is typically a 5-point or 7-point scale, where the middle point
represents ‘no opinion’. By using a well-designed set of Likert items, the respondents' opinions on an issue
can be gauged.
Although Likert tests seem straightforward to use, there are several pitfalls that T802 students commonly
fall into (a good, technical overview of these issues is given by Carifio and Perla (2007)).

1. Using too few items
A well-designed survey should use a range of Likert items to obtain a rounded view of the respondent's
opinion. The 5-point scale typically used for a Likert item is a very coarse-grained tool for an individual
question, particularly when the response might also be swayed by misinterpretation of the question, or
different cultural or technological presumptions on the part of the respondent.

A similar danger is attempting to interpret a single response outside the context of the rest of the survey
(although with a well-designed survey, this should not be a problem).

2. Using an inappropriate response format
A common mistake made by T802 students is to omit the middle point from the response list. For example,
the survey might use a 4-point response list with options, ‘Strongly disagree’, ‘Somewhat disagree’,
‘Somewhat agree’ and ‘Strongly agree’. This is known as a ‘forced choice’ questionnaire. Survey writers
sometimes feel that this is a useful technique to stop respondents from sitting on the fence. However, in
T802 research, this attitude is quite inappropriate: your respondents may genuinely hold no opinion and
should have the scope in the survey to express this. If you think that neutral responses will not give you
the information that you require, you should reconsider the items in your survey, rather than force your
respondents to answer in ways that they might consider incorrectly reflect their views.
Even worse is the use of an unbalanced response list; that is, one in which there are not an equal number
of points either side of neutrality. Using an unbalanced response list runs the risk of skewing the data.

Figure 16 Example of a forced choice, unbalanced Likert item – do not do this!
Show description

The example in Figure 16 illustrates both of these problems. The respondent has not been allowed to state
that (s)he has no opinion (which would presumably fall somewhere between ‘slightly disagree’ and ‘slightly
agree’), and there are two options below this mid-point, and three options above it.

3. Interpreting responses as numerical values
When analysing the results of a Likert item from a survey, it is common to find students (and others!)
attempting to scale the items to try to find a mean or a standard deviation. For example, you might be
tempted to assign values to the possible-responses for the 5-point Likert item in Figure 15 as:

Response

Score

Strongly disagree

-2

Somewhat disagree

-1

Neither agree nor disagree

0

Somewhat agree

1

Strongly agree

2

Then if, say, three respondents selected ‘Somewhat disagree’ while six responded ‘Strongly agree’ you
might conclude that the average response was:
[(3 x -1) + (6 x 2)] / 9 = 1
and so conclude that the average (perhaps representing the dominant view of the population?) is 1, or
‘Somewhat agree’.
This attempted analysis makes no sense. What, for example, is a mean score of 1 supposed to mean
(what are the units of opinion)? How is a response of ‘Strongly agree’ supposed to represent twice as
much of what ‘Somewhat agree’ represents? Twice as much of what? Why not three, four or five times?
Some respondents are more likely than others to respond at the extremes of the available responses; how
does this sort of numerical approach compensate for that?
Bear in mind that although the data you collect have an inherent order, (‘Somewhat disagree’ and ‘Strongly
agree’ both represent more agreement than ‘Strongly disagree’), this does not mean that the responses
can be placed at equally spaced points along some numerical scale. So do not assume, for example, that
the difference between ‘Somewhat disagree’ and ‘Neither agree nor disagree’ is somehow the same as the
difference between ‘Somewhat agree’ and ‘Strongly agree’.
So when analysing responses to Likert tests:
1. Do not attempt to take a mean from some numerical coding of the responses. The mode is a usable
statistic, if using the mode will give you a useful insight into the responses.
2. For the same reason, do not attempt to calculate a standard deviation. As the responses to Likert
items are not, in fact, numerical, the standard deviation from a numerical encoding will not be
meaningful. It is reasonable to talk about the range of responses (so you might write something like
‘Responses ranged from ‘Strongly disagree’ to ‘Somewhat agree’, with most (55% of) respondents
selecting ‘Neither agree nor disagree’).
3. The best way to present the responses is in a bar chart, with a separate bar for each item in the
response set. Do not merge separate response items into single bars, and do not present the results
as a histogram, or any other format which suggests that the results exist on a continuum.

Activity 4
Go to Activity 4 on the use of qualitative data.

5 Deriving conclusions from data: context and reliability
The issue of how certain you can be about your conclusions, and the extent to which you can generalise
from them, is always dependent on the sample size you are able to work with in your data gathering. The
size and scope of your sample will always be a compromise. Ideally, you should select a large number of
samples possessing an appropriate range of features that represent the whole population being
investigated. In practice, you may be severely limited by the constraints of time and money, particularly in
T802 for which less than six months is allocated for data collection. Where you would ideally like to carry
out ten case studies, you may be limited to three, with the consequent difficulty of having to select the
three that can be classed as most representative of the target population. Consequently you need to be
modest about your conclusions and whether they can be abstracted or generalised for a much larger
population.
Some more general overviews of how you can use and interpret data to support your research can be
found in general guides such as Moore (1999) or Potter (2006). A good work which focuses heavily on how
to handle evidence to validate hypotheses is given by Sapsford and Jupp (2006).
Also, it is rarely (if ever) appropriate to conclude that your conclusions are absolutely ‘proved’ or
‘disproved’. In almost all cases, the most that you can conclude is that your evidence achieves your
research objectives to a greater or lesser degree. Indeed, it is quite possible that some evidence will
support it and other evidence will contradict it. It is your job to determine how far your data goes in
addressing your research aim, and explain that to your readers.

References
Blaxter, L., Hughes, C. and Tight, M. (2006) How to Research, 3rd edn, Open University Press.
Carifio, J. and Perla, R. J. (2007) ‘Ten Common Misunderstandings, Misconceptions, Persistent Myths and
Urban Legends about Likert Scales and Likert Response Formats and their Antidotes’, Journal of Social
Sciences, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 106–116.
Huff, D. (1991) How to Lie with Statistics, London, Penguin.
Moore, N. (1999) How to do Research: The Complete Guide to Designing and Managing Research
Projects, 3rd edn, London, Library Association.
Potter, S. (ed) (2006) Doing Postgraduate Research, 2nd edn, London, Sage Publications/Milton Keynes,
The Open University.
Rees, D.G. (2000) Essential Statistics, 4th edn, London, Chapman and Hall.
Rowntree, D. (2000) Statistics Without Tears: An Introduction for Non-Mathematicians, London, Penguin
Books.
Sapsford, R. and Jupp, V. (eds) (2006) Data Collection and Analysis, 2nd edn, London, Sage
Publications/Milton Keynes, The Open University.
Schulmeyer, G. G. and McCabe, T. J. (1998) ‘The Pareto Principle Applied to Software Quality Assurance’
in Schulmeyer, G. G. and McManus, J. I. (eds) Handbook of Software Quality Assurance, 3rd edn, Upper

Saddle River, New Jersey, Prentice Hall PTR.
Silverman, D. (2004) Doing Qualitative Research: A Practical Handbook, 2nd edn, London, Sage
Publications.

